%=============================================================================%
%                                Dissertation                                 %
%                               Manuel Schlund                                %
%                                  (c) 2020                                   %
%=============================================================================%
%                        Papers ECS and TCR assessment                        %
%=============================================================================%



\chapter{Assessment of Climate Sensitivity in the \acs{CMIP}6 Ensemble}
\label{ch:04:papers_ecs_tcr_assessment}

In order to reduce uncertainties in multi-model climate projections, a first
important step is the assessment of the desired target variables in the
corresponding climate model ensemble. This is particularly relevant when a new
generation of \acp{ESM} is published that includes considerable modifications
compared to the respective predecessor model versions. Currently, we are in a
situation like this with the \acs{CMIP}6 ensemble, for which new data is still
released every day (as of \TheMonth{}). In light of the upcoming international
climate assessment of the \ac{IPCC}'s \acs{AR}6, the evaluation of
policy-relevant metrics like \ac{ECS} or \ac{TCR} for these new \acs{CMIP}6
models is crucial since they provide vital information about the future climate
of planet Earth. As the \ac{ESMValTool} is an excellent tool that allows for a
quick and robust evaluation of new \ac{CMIP} data as soon as it gets published
on the \ac{ESGF} servers (see \cref{sec:03:esmvaltool}), we use it to assess
and analyze climate sensitivity (expressed by \ac{ECS} and \ac{TCR}) of the
\acs{CMIP}6 models and compare it to corresponding results of predecessor model
generations. This work is already published in two scientific papers:
\textcite{Bock2020} and \textcite{Meehl2020}. For \textcite{Bock2020}, the
author of this thesis contributed their figure 8 (a bar chart showing the
\ac{ECS} for the three climate model generations \acs{CMIP}3, \acs{CMIP}5 and
\acs{CMIP}6), their figure 10 (map plots showing cloud-related feedback
parameters for the \acs{CMIP}5 and \acs{CMIP}6 \acp{MMM}; see
\cref{fig:04:cloud_feedback_parameters}) and discussion about \ac{ECS} of the
\acs{CMIP}6 models. For \textcite{Meehl2020}, the author of this thesis
contributed all figures and tables of the study and details on the calculations
of \ac{ECS} and \ac{TCR}.


\section{Evaluation of \acs{ECS} and \acs{TCR} over the Years}
\label{sec:04:evaluation_ecs_and_tcr}

Following \cref{subsec:02:ecs}, \ac{ECS} is calculated with the Gregory
regression method using \ac{GSAT} and \ac{TOA} net radiation data for 150 years
of a \nxcotwo{4} simulation \autocite{Gregory2004}. In contrast to that, the
transient response of the climate system \ac{TCR} is calculated from \ac{GSAT}
data at the time of \ac{CO2} doubling in a \onepctcotwo{} run
\commentcite{Bindoff2013}{see \cref{subsec:02:tcr}}. Using these definitions,
we assessed \ac{ECS} and \ac{TCR} for all \acs{CMIP}5 and \acs{CMIP}6 models
where the necessary data is available (as of \TheMonth{}) using the
\ac{ESMValTool}. \Cref{tab:04:ecs_tcr_cmip5,tab:04:ecs_tcr_cmip6} give an
overview over the results for the \acs{CMIP}5 and \acs{CMIP}6 models,
respectively.

\begin{table}[!t]
  \centering
  \csvreader[ECSAndTCRTable]{
    ch04_papers_ecs_tcr_assessment/data/CMIP5_ecs-tcr.csv}{}{
    \dataset & \idx & \ecs & \tcr}
  \caption{\acf{ECS} and \acf{TCR} evaluated for the \acs{CMIP}5 models.
    Details on the calculation on \acs{ECS} and \acs{TCR} are given in
    \cref{subsec:02:ecs} and \cref{subsec:02:tcr}, respectively.}
  \label{tab:04:ecs_tcr_cmip5}
\end{table}

\begin{table}[p]
  \centering
  \csvreader[ECSAndTCRTable]{
    ch04_papers_ecs_tcr_assessment/data/CMIP6_ecs-tcr.csv}{}{
    \dataset & \idx & \ecs & \tcr}
  \caption{As in \cref{tab:04:ecs_tcr_cmip5} but for the \acs{CMIP}6 models.}
  \label{tab:04:ecs_tcr_cmip6}
\end{table}

The first striking feature of these two tables is the increased \ac{MMM} of
\ac{ECS} and \ac{TCR} in \acs{CMIP}6. For \ac{ECS}, the \acs{CMIP}6 \ac{MMM} is
about $16 \unit{\%}$ ($0.51 \unit{K}$) higher than the corresponding
\acs{CMIP}5 \ac{MMM}. For \ac{TCR}, the relative difference between the two
model ensembles is notably smaller with about $10 \unit{\%}$ ($0.19 \unit{K}$).
The spread in the multi-model ensembles (expressed as the multi-model standard
deviation) shows an even larger increase in the \acs{CMIP}6 ensemble: For
\ac{ECS}, the relative difference is about $49 \unit{\%}$ ($0.72 \unit{K}$ in
\acs{CMIP}5 to $1.07 \unit{K}$ in \acs{CMIP}6) and for \ac{TCR}, the relative
difference is about $17 \unit{\%}$ ($0.36 \unit{K}$ in \acs{CMIP}5 to $0.42
\unit{K}$ in \acs{CMIP}6). The main reason for the increased \ac{MMM} and
spread in the \acs{CMIP}6 ensemble is the existence of several models with very
high values of \ac{ECS} and \ac{TCR}. In addition to that, there also exists a
number of models with very low values of \ac{ECS}. Therefore, the \ac{CMIP}6
model ranges of \ac{ECS} and \ac{TCR} are well outside the corresponding
assessed ranges given by the latest published \acl{AR} of the \ac{IPCC} from
2013 \autocite{Stocker2013} with $\range{1.8}{5.6} \unit{K}$ (\acs{AR}5:
$\range{1.5}{4.5} \unit{K}$) and  $\range{1.3}{3.0} \unit{K}$ (\acs{AR}5:
$\range{1.0}{2.5} \unit{K}$) for \ac{ECS} and \ac{TCR}, respectively.

\begin{figure}[t]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\LargeFigureWidth{}]{
    ch04_papers_ecs_tcr_assessment/figs/historical_ecs_tcr_ranges.pdf}
  \caption{Assessed values of the \acf{ECS} (blue bars) and the \acf{TCR} (red
    bars) over the years in the Charney report from 1979 \autocite{Charney1979}
    and the subsequent \acp{AR} of the \acf{IPCC}. Orange and green bars
    represent the modeled ranges of \acs{ECS} and \acs{TCR}, respectively, from
    the different climate model ensembles of the \acf{CMIP} with the
    corresponding \acf{MMM} illustrated with the horizontal black lines (the
    green dot represents output from a single climate model). The numbers
    correspond to individual \acs{CMIP}5 and \acs{CMIP}6 models (see
    \cref{tab:04:ecs_tcr_cmip5,tab:04:ecs_tcr_cmip6}). Updated from
    \textcite{Meehl2020}.}
  \label{fig:04:historical_ecs_tcr_ranges}
\end{figure}

To illustrate this and put it into historical context,
\cref{fig:04:historical_ecs_tcr_ranges} shows the assessed \ac{ECS} and
\ac{TCR} ranges over the years from the Charney report \autocite{Charney1979}
and the different \acp{AR} of the \ac{IPCC} in combination with the
corresponding modeled ranges from the different \ac{CMIP} generations. Since
the Charney report in 1979, the assessed range of \ac{ECS} of $\range{1.5}{4.5}
\unit{K}$ has almost remained unchanged during the last 40 years (with the
exception of \acs{AR}4, where the lower bound was temporarily increased to $2.0
\unit{K}$). For \acs{AR}2, \acs{AR}4 and \acs{AR}5, the corresponding climate
model generations from \acs{CMIP}1, \acs{CMIP}5 and \acs{CMIP}6 more or less
agree with this assessed range. In contrast to that, some of the early climate
models used in \acs{AR}1 and the \acs{CMIP}2 models used in \acs{AR}3 exhibit
values of \acs{ECS} above $4.5 \unit{K}$, resulting in a upper model range of
about $0.6 \unit{K}$ higher than the assessed range. However, these deviations
from the assessed range are negligible to the ones present in the \acs{CMIP}6
ensemble, which have become evident over the course of 2020. As shown in
\cref{fig:04:historical_ecs_tcr_ranges}, both the lower and upper bounds are
more extreme than in any previous climate model generation, resulting in a
\acs{CMIP}6 model range of $\range{1.8}{5.6} \unit{K}$ (as of \TheMonth{}).
This increase in range is particularly relevant for the upper bound, which is
about $1.1 \unit{K}$ higher than the assessed upper bound of $4.5 \unit{K}$.
Moreover, not only a small fraction of models exceeds this upper bounds: out of
the 42 analyzed \ac{CMIP}6 models, a third (14 models) has an \ac{ECS} above
$4.5 \unit{K}$. Because of the massive political and societal relevance of
\ac{ECS}, its apparent increase in the \ac{CMIP}6 ensemble is currently one of
the most important questions for the entire climate modeling community. A list
of possible reasons for this increased climate sensitivity is given in
\cref{sec:04:possible_reasons_high_ecs_cmip6}.


\section{Possible Reasons for High Climate Sensitivity in \acs{CMIP}6}
\label{sec:04:possible_reasons_high_ecs_cmip6}
